[blog] htmx blog (#109)
JankariTech/blog: src/assets/htmx/htmx.md

---
title: Introduction to htmx
authorName: Niraj Acharya
authorAvatar: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/122071597?v=4
authorLink: https://github.com/nirajacharya2
createdAt: Apr 3, 2024
tags: js, html, go, htmx
banner: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/bigskysoftware/htmx/master/www/static/img/htmx_logo.1.png
---

htmx is a UI library written in JavaScript that extends the features of HTML. It can be extended to make AJAX requests, do CSS transitions, connect to WebSockets and handle Server Sent Events inside an HTML document with just some declarative HTML attributes.

htmx was created by Carson Gross in 2013 because he found HTML to be limited for what he was trying to achieve. htmx tries to solve the following limitations of HTML:

- only `<a>` and `<form>` tags are able to make HTTP requests

> - only `click` & `submit` events trigger them
> - only `GET` & `POST` methods are available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- only `click` and `submit` events trigger them
- only `GET` and `POST` methods are available
```

- and when using `<a>` and `<form>` the whole screen gets replaced

In this blog, we will learn how htmx enhances HTML and overcomes the limitations mentioned above.

**Note:**

I will be using go for the code examples given in this blog post.
If you are not familiar with go you can learn the basics from [here](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Journey%20With%20Go%20-%20A%20Blog%20Series/Go%20Basics%20-%20The%20Starting%20Point).

> Through out this blog I will be providing small snippets of my code instead of the actual implementation and I will not go into how to create a webserver to serve the endpoints. For that you might want to read [this blog](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Serving%20your%20cat%20video%20using%20the%20Internet%20-%20A%20basic%20understanding%20of%20HTTP%20and%20socket%20programming%20(in%20Java)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Throughout this blog I will be providing small snippets of my code instead of the actual implementation and I will not go into how to create a webserver to serve the endpoints. For that you might want to read [this blog](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Serving%20your%20cat%20video%20using%20the%20Internet%20-%20A%20basic%20understanding%20of%20HTTP%20and%20socket%20programming%20(in%20Java)).
```

## Using htmx

We can simply use htmx by adding a script tag in the header of our HTML.

```html
<head>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/htmx.org@1.9.5"></script>
</head>
```

htmx claims to be small (~14k min.gz’d), dependency-free, extendable, IE11 compatible and 67% less code when compared with react.

Now let's see how to make a simple AJAX request in htmx.

## Making AJAX request (GET)

> First, let's make an endpoint to get data from. So, let's begin by creating few endpoints for this example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, let's make an endpoint to get data from. So, let's begin by creating a few endpoints for this example.
```

```go
func getRoot(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    http.ServeFile(w, r, "./static/index.HTML")
}

func hi(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    io.WriteString(w, "<div>hi</div>")
}
func main() {
    http.HandleFunc("GET /", getRoot)
    http.HandleFunc("GET /hello", hi)
    http.ListenAndServe(":3333", nil)
}
```

> In the above code example, we made two endpoints: `/` to serve the HTML file and `/hello` will return a HTML element. htmx gets the body of the response and renders it on the page, therefore the response of our function should be HTML code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the above code example, we made two endpoints: `/` to serve the HTML file and `/hello` will return an HTML element. htmx gets the body of the response and renders it on the page, therefore the response of our function should be HTML code.
```

Now we will see how to use the `hello` endpoint in HTML:

```html
<div hx-post="/hello">hello</div>
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/hi.gif)

> As seen above the endpoint is working. The content of the `div` is replaced by the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As seen above, the endpoint is working. The content of the `div` is replaced by the response.
```

Because we did not define any specific event to trigger the AJAX request, it will be triggered by clicking the `hello` text.

We can explicitly define it like this:

```html
<div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click">hello</div>
```

htmx has other predefined events like this:

> - `hx-trigger="mouseenter"` is triggered every time when the mouse enters the element

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `hx-trigger="mouseenter"` is triggered every time that the mouse enters the element
```

- `hx-trigger="mouseenter once"` is triggered when the mouse enters the element for the first time and won't trigger after that
- `hx-trigger="click[ctrlKey]"` is triggered when the element is clicked while holding the `Ctrl` key
- `hx-trigger="every 2s"` is triggered every two seconds

You can find more on this subject in the htmx [docs](https://htmx.org/docs/#triggers).

Currently, our example above replaces the element that makes the AJAX request, but we can specify which element is going to get replaced using the `hx-target` attribute:

```html
<div id="replace" class="replace">replace me</div>

> <div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="#replace">click me to replace element above</div>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="#replace">click me to replace the element above</div>
```

```

> We can also use a class name like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as target.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can also use a class name like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as the target.
```

In the following example we have two `foo` elements:

```html
<foo id="1" class="replace">replace me 1</foo>
<foo id="2" class="replace">replace me 2</foo>
<bar hx-post="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="foo">replace foo element</bar>
```

> The first of the `foo` elements will be taken as target. So in this example the first `foo` element with `id=1` will be replaced by the response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first of the `foo` elements will be taken as the target. So in this example the first `foo` element with `id=1` will be replaced by the response.
```

## Making a todo app

> Since we learned the basics, let's write a todo app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we have learned the basics, let's write a todo app.
```

First start with making a submit form for adding a todo task.

For that, we will only need an input box and a button in our HTML code:

```html
<div id="app" class="container">
  <div id="todo-list"></div>
  <form
    id="myForm"
    hx-post="/save"
    hx-trigger="submit"
    hx-target="#todo-list"
  >
    <input type="text" name="task" required />
    <input type="submit" value="save" />
  </form>
</div>
```

> Now let's have a look on what is needed on the server side:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now let's have a look at what is needed on the server side:
```

    ...
}
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/save.gif)

In the HTML above, the form will send a post request to the `/save` endpoint and htmx will replace the content in the div with the id `todo-list`. The response will replace everything in the target element i.e., the element with id `todo-list` will be replaced and looks like this:

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

After adding another todo item to the list, the HTML document looks like this:

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```

That is not quite what we want. We want to append the new todo item after the last todo item. So we use the attribute `hx-swap` to let htmx know where we want the response to render. The `beforeend` value will append the HTML response before the end of the targeted element.

After the swap the code will look like this:

```html
<div id="app" class="container">
  <div id="todo-list"></div>
  <form
    id="myForm"
    hx-post="/save"
    hx-trigger="submit"
    hx-target="#todo-list"
    hx-swap="beforeend"
  >
    broadcast<input type="text" name="task" required />
    <input type="submit" value="save" />
  </form>
</div>
```

> Adding first item (item 1):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding the first item (item 1):
```

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

> After adding second item (item 2):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After adding the second item (item 2):
```

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/savemultiple.gif)

Adding multiple todo items is working now but on page load (e.g. if we refresh the page) the list of tasks is not being loaded.
To make that work, we need to make a `GET` request.

```html
<div id="todo-list" hx-get="/taskList" hx-trigger="load"></div>
```

In the above HTML, I have added `hx-get` with value '/tasklist' and `hx-trigger` with value 'load'. The 'load' value specifies when the request is sent. In this case it's when the HTML file is loaded.

```go
func listTask(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {

>     tastList := getTODO() // gets data from database and returns HTML

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    tastList := getTODO() // gets data from the database and returns HTML
```

    io.WriteString(w, tastList)
}
func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/save", listTask)
    ...
}
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/getalltask.gif)

Now the list is shown even when the page is refreshed.

> For edit let's try something different: instead of doing all our operations in a single page we will be navigating to another page to do the edit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For edit let's try something different: instead of doing all our operations in a single page, we will be navigating to another page to do the edit.
```

For that, I will update the list template and add a delete form:

```html
<div hx-boost="true" class="new-element">
  <a href="/task/1">clean room</a>
  <form
    hx-trigger="click"
    hx-delete="/delete"
    hx-target="closest .new-element"
    hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"
  >
    <input type="hidden" name="task" value="1" />
    delete
  </form>
</div>
```

Most of the snippets in the delete form are similar to the other examples. But in the `hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"` attribute, I added an extra value. This value will delay the swapping of the element by 1 second because I want to do a CSS animation during that time.

While htmx is doing the swapping of the element, it also adds the `htmx-swapping` class to the element.

Now I can add any CSS effect I want to the `htmx-swapping` class.

```CSS
.htmx-swapping {
  opacity: 0;
  transition: opacity 1s ease-out;
}
```

![demo](/src/assets/htmx/delete.gif)

## WebSockets

Currently, if we add a todo task to our list, it won't be shown in another tab or browser opening the same page. This can be achieved using WebSockets. Fortunately htmx supports WebSockets.

```html
<div id="ws" hx-ws="connect:/ws" hx-trigger="task"></div>
```

> The `hx-ws` attribute takes the websocket endpoint and makes a connection to it.

Reviewer 3: Since "WebSocket" is the name of a particular API, make sure you consistently spell in the same way throughout your blog. Currently you sometimes write WebSocket(s) and in other places websocket(s). Of course you can use singular or plural depending on the context.

> After adding this line to the code, I just have to create a WebSockets that listens for input by the user and broadcasts it to all clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After adding this line to the code, I just have to create a WebSocket that listens for input by the user and broadcasts it to all clients.
```

> Now in my code I just have to create a websocket that listines for input by the user and broadcast it to all clients.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After adding this line to the code I just have to create a websocket that listens for input by the user and broadcasts it to all clients.
```

```go
import(
    ...
    "golang.org/x/net/websocket"
    "sync"
    ...
)

func main(){
    ...
    server := NewServer()

>     http.Handle("/ws", websocket.Handler(server.websocketHandler)) // handel the saving and broadcasting of data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    http.Handle("/ws", websocket.Handler(server.websocketHandler)) // handles the saving and broadcasting of data
```

    ...
}
```

Update the form

```HTML
<form

>   id="myForm1"

Reviewer 3: something more descriptive as id might help the user to understand this example better

  hx-ws="send:submit"
  hx-target="#todo-list"
  hx-swap="beforeend"
>
  <input type="text" name="task" required />
  <input type="submit" value="save ws" />
</form>
```

> In the `hx-ws` attribute of form we are telling htmx to send the values to the WebSockets endpoint on the submit event.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the `hx-ws` attribute of the form we are telling htmx to send the values to the WebSockets endpoint on the submit event.
```

htmx was created by Carson Gross in 2013 because he found HTML to be limited for what he was trying to achieve. htmx tries to solve the following limitations of HTML:

- only `<a>` and `<form>` tags are able to make HTTP requests
- only `click` & `submit` events trigger them
- only `GET` & `POST` methods are available
- and when using `<a>` and `<form>` the whole screen gets replaced

In this blog, we will learn how htmx enhances HTML and overcomes the limitations mentioned above.

## Using htmx

We can simply use htmx by adding a script tag in the header of our HTML.

```html
<head>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/htmx.org@1.9.5"></script>
</head>
```

htmx claims to be small (~14k min.gz’d), dependency-free, extendable, IE11 compatible & 67% less code when compared with react.

Now let's see how to make a simple AJAX request in htmx.

## Making AJAX request (GET)

First, let's make an endpoint to get data from. I will be using go for the code examples given in this blog post.
If you are not familiar with go you can learn the basics from [here](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Journey%20With%20Go%20-%20A%20Blog%20Series/Go%20Basics%20-%20The%20Starting%20Point).

> Through out this blog i will be providing small snippets of my code instead of the actual implementation and i will not go into how to create a webserver to server the endpoints. For that you might want to read [this blog](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Serving%20your%20cat%20video%20using%20the%20Internet%20-%20A%20basic%20understanding%20of%20HTTP%20and%20socket%20programming%20(in%20Java))

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Through out this blog I will be providing small snippets of my code instead of the actual implementation and I will not go into how to create a webserver to serve the endpoints. For that you might want to read [this blog](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Serving%20your%20cat%20video%20using%20the%20Internet%20-%20A%20basic%20understanding%20of%20HTTP%20and%20socket%20programming%20(in%20Java))
```

Because we did not define any specific event to trigger the AJAX request it will be triggered by clicking the `hello` text.

We can explicitly define it like this:

```html
<div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click">hello</div>
```

htmx has other predefined events like this:

- `hx-trigger="mouseenter"` is triggered every time when the mouse enters the element
- `hx-trigger="mouseenter once"` is triggered when the mouse enters the element for the first time and won't trigger after that
- `hx-trigger="click[ctrlKey]"` is triggered when the element is clicked while holding the `Ctrl` key
- `hx-trigger="every 2s"` is triggered every two seconds

You can find more on this subject in the htmx [docs](https://htmx.org/docs/#triggers).

Currently, our example above replaces the element that makes the AJAX request, but we can specify which element is going to get replaced using the `hx-target` attribute:

```html
<div id="replace" class="replace">replace me</div>
<div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="#replace">click me to replace element above</div>
```

We can also use a class name like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as target.

> For example, If we have two elements `foo`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, if we have two elements `foo`
```

<foo id="2" class="replace">replace me 2</foo>
<bar hx-post="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="foo">replace foo element</bar>
```

The first of the `foo` elements will be taken as target. So in this example the first `foo` element with `id=1` will be replaced by the response.

## Making a todo app
Since we learned the basics, let's write a todo app.

First start with making a submit form for adding a todo task.

For that, we will only need an input box and a button in our html code:

```html
<div id="app" class="container">
  <div id="todo-list"></div>
  <form
    id="myForm"
    hx-post="/save"
    hx-trigger="submit"
    hx-target="#todo-list"
  >
    <input type="text" name="task" required />
    <input type="submit" value="save" />
  </form>
</div>
```

Now let's have a look on what is needed on the server side:

```go
func save(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    r.ParseForm()
    insert(r.FormValue("task")) // save to database
    taskList := "<div>" + r.FormValue("task") + " </div>"
    io.WriteString(w, taskList)
}

func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/save", save)
    ...
}
```

![demo](src/assets/htmx/save.gif)

> In the HTML above, the form will send a post request to the `/save` endpoint and htmx will replace the content in the div with the id `todo-list`. The response will replace everything in the target element i.e., the element with id `todo-list` will be replaced.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the HTML above, the form will send a post request to the `/save` endpoint and htmx will replace the content in the div with the id `todo-list`. The response will replace everything in the target element i.e., the element with id `todo-list` will be replaced and looks like this:
```

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

> After adding another todo item to the list

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After adding another todo item to the list the HTML document looks like this:
```

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```

> Instead, we want to only append the new todo item after the last todo item. so we use the attribute `hx-swap` to let htmx know where we want the response to render. The `beforeend` value will append the HTML response before the end of the targeted element.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
That is not quite what we want. We want to append the new todo item after the last todo item. So we use the attribute `hx-swap` to let htmx know where we want the response to render. The `beforeend` value will append the HTML response before the end of the targeted element.
```

After the swap the code will look like this:

```html
<div id="app" class="container">
  <div id="todo-list"></div>
  <form
    id="myForm"
    hx-post="/save"
    hx-trigger="submit"
    hx-target="#todo-list"
    hx-swap="beforeend"
  >
    broadcast<input type="text" name="task" required />
    <input type="submit" value="save" />
  </form>
</div>
```

adding (item 1):

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

After adding another item (item 2):

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```
![demo](src/assets/htmx/savemultiple.gif)

> Adding multiple todo item is working now but on page load (e.g. if we refresh the page) the list of tasks are not being .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Adding multiple todo items is working now but on page load (e.g. if we refresh the page) the list of tasks are not being .
```

being what? shown? listed?

To make that work, we need to make a `GET` request.

```html
<div id="todo-list" hx-get="/taskList" hx-trigger="load"></div>
```

> In the above HTML, I have added `hx-get` with value `/tasklist` and `hx-trigger` with value 'load'. The `load` value specifies when the request is sent in this case it's when the HTML file is loaded.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the above HTML, I have added `hx-get` with value `/tasklist` and `hx-trigger` with value 'load'. The `load` value specifies when the request is sent. In this case it's when the HTML file is loaded.
```

In this blog, we will learn how htmx enhances HTML and overcomes the limitations mentioned above.

**Note:**

I will be using go for the code examples given in this blog post.
If you are not familiar with go you can learn the basics from [here](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Journey%20With%20Go%20-%20A%20Blog%20Series/Go%20Basics%20-%20The%20Starting%20Point).

Through out this blog I will be providing small snippets of my code instead of the actual implementation and I will not go into how to create a webserver to serve the endpoints. For that you might want to read [this blog](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Serving%20your%20cat%20video%20using%20the%20Internet%20-%20A%20basic%20understanding%20of%20HTTP%20and%20socket%20programming%20(in%20Java))

## Using htmx

We can simply use htmx by adding a script tag in the header of our HTML.

```html
<head>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/htmx.org@1.9.5"></script>
</head>
```

htmx claims to be small (~14k min.gz’d), dependency-free, extendable, IE11 compatible & 67% less code when compared with react.

Now let's see how to make a simple AJAX request in htmx.

## Making AJAX request (GET)

> First, let's make an endpoint to get data from. I will be using go for the code examples given in this blog post.
> If you are not familiar with go you can learn the basics from [here](https://blog.jankaritech.com/#/blog/Journey%20With%20Go%20-%20A%20Blog%20Series/Go%20Basics%20-%20The%20Starting%20Point).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, let's make an endpoint to get data from. 
```
remove this sentence here since you already mentioned this and shared the same link in the introduction.

> So, let's begin by creating few endpoints for this example.

Reviewer 3: having moved the general notes into the introduction, you can merge line 46 and line 49 into one sentence or delete one of them since they say more or less the same.

```go
func getRoot(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    http.ServeFile(w, r, "./static/index.HTML")
}

func hi(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    io.WriteString(w, "<div>hi</div>")
}
func main() {
    http.HandleFunc("GET /", getRoot)
    http.HandleFunc("GET /hello", hi)
    http.ListenAndServe(":3333", nil)
}
```

> In the above code example, we made two endpoints. `/` to serve the HTML file and `/hello` will return a HTML element. htmx gets the body of the response and renders it on the page, therefore the response of our function should be HTML code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the above code example, we made two endpoints: `/` to serve the HTML file and `/hello` will return a HTML element. htmx gets the body of the response and renders it on the page, therefore the response of our function should be HTML code.
```

Now we will see how to use the `hello` endpoint in HTML:

```html
<div hx-post="/hello">hello</div>
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/hi.gif)

As seen above the endpoint is working. The content of the `div` is replaced by the response.

> Because we did not define any specific event to trigger the AJAX request it will be triggered by clicking the `hello` text.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because we did not define any specific event to trigger the AJAX request, it will be triggered by clicking the `hello` text.
```

We can explicitly define it like this:

```html
<div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click">hello</div>
```

htmx has other predefined events like this:

- `hx-trigger="mouseenter"` is triggered every time when the mouse enters the element
- `hx-trigger="mouseenter once"` is triggered when the mouse enters the element for the first time and won't trigger after that
- `hx-trigger="click[ctrlKey]"` is triggered when the element is clicked while holding the `Ctrl` key
- `hx-trigger="every 2s"` is triggered every two seconds

You can find more on this subject in the htmx [docs](https://htmx.org/docs/#triggers).

Currently, our example above replaces the element that makes the AJAX request, but we can specify which element is going to get replaced using the `hx-target` attribute:

```html
<div id="replace" class="replace">replace me</div>
<div hx-get="/hello" hx-trigger="click" hx-target="#replace">click me to replace element above</div>
```

We can also use a class name like `.replace` or give elements like `body` as target.

> For example, if we have two elements `foo`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following example we have two `foo` elements:
```

First start with making a submit form for adding a todo task.

For that, we will only need an input box and a button in our HTML code:

```html
<div id="app" class="container">
  <div id="todo-list"></div>
  <form
    id="myForm"
    hx-post="/save"
    hx-trigger="submit"
    hx-target="#todo-list"
  >
    <input type="text" name="task" required />
    <input type="submit" value="save" />
  </form>
</div>
```

Now let's have a look on what is needed on the server side:

```go
func save(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    r.ParseForm()
    insert(r.FormValue("task")) // save to database
    taskList := "<div>" + r.FormValue("task") + " </div>"
    io.WriteString(w, taskList)
}

func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/save", save)
    ...
}
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/save.gif)

In the HTML above, the form will send a post request to the `/save` endpoint and htmx will replace the content in the div with the id `todo-list`. The response will replace everything in the target element i.e., the element with id `todo-list` will be replaced and looks like this:

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

> After adding another todo item to the list the HTML document looks like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After adding another todo item to the list, the HTML document looks like this:
```

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```

> That is not quite what we want. We want to append the new todo item after the last todo item. so we use the attribute `hx-swap` to let htmx know where we want the response to render. The `beforeend` value will append the HTML response before the end of the targeted element.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That is not quite what we want. We want to append the new todo item after the last todo item. So we use the attribute `hx-swap` to let htmx know where we want the response to render. The `beforeend` value will append the HTML response before the end of the targeted element.
```

After the swap the code will look like this:

```html
<div id="app" class="container">
  <div id="todo-list"></div>
  <form
    id="myForm"
    hx-post="/save"
    hx-trigger="submit"
    hx-target="#todo-list"
    hx-swap="beforeend"
  >
    broadcast<input type="text" name="task" required />
    <input type="submit" value="save" />
  </form>
</div>
```

Adding first item (item 1):

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

After adding second item (item 2):

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/savemultiple.gif)

> Adding multiple todo items is working now but on page load (e.g. if we refresh the page) the list of tasks are not being loaded.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Adding multiple todo items is working now, but on page load (e.g. if we refresh the page) the list of tasks is not being loaded.
```
the subject (the list) is in singular, therefore the verb needs to be conjugated in singular

To make that work, we need to make a `GET` request.

```html
<div id="todo-list" hx-get="/taskList" hx-trigger="load"></div>
```

> In the above HTML, I have added `hx-get` with value `/tasklist` and `hx-trigger` with value 'load'. The `load` value specifies when the request is sent. In this case it's when the HTML file is loaded.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the above HTML, I have added `hx-get` with value `/tasklist` and `hx-trigger` with value `load`. The `load` value specifies when the request is sent. In this case it's when the HTML file is loaded.
```
or 
```suggestion
In the above HTML, I have added `hx-get` with value '/tasklist' and `hx-trigger` with value 'load'. The 'load' value specifies when the request is sent. In this case it's when the HTML file is loaded.
```
use the same style to highlight things of the same type (values), either '' or `` for both

```go
func listTask(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    tastList := getTODO() // gets data from database and returns HTML
    io.WriteString(w, tastList)
}
func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/save", listTask)
    ...
}
```
![demo](/src/assets/htmx/getalltask.gif)

Now the list is shown even when the page is refreshed.

> For edit let's try something different instead of doing all our operations in a single we will be navigating to another page to do the edit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For edit let's try something different: instead of doing all our operations in a single page we will be navigating to another page to do the edit.
```
something is missing after single... single page? single ...?

> First let's make clicking on the todo item go to a different page that will contain a form for updating the todo item list.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, let's make clicking on the todo item go to a different page that will contain a form for updating the todo item list.
```

```go
func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/task/", individualTask)
    ...
}
```

Example response from server:

```htmx
  <div hx-boost="true">
      <a href="/task/1">clean room</a>
  </div>
```

Here the `hx-boost` attribute will replace the body element and add the previous page to the history entry.
That means the back button on browsers will work perfectly.

![demo](/src/assets/htmx/editpage.gif)

For the actual editing, it will be similar to the other examples.

```html
<div>
  <div>clean room</div>
  <form id="myForm2" hx-put="/edit" hx-target="#app">
    <input type="text" name="task" required="" />
    <input type="hidden" name="old" value="1" />
    <input type="submit" value="edit" />
  </form>
</div>
```

Now let's perform deletion on the list.

First, we have to make a delete button.

For that, I will update the list template and add a delete form:

```html
<div hx-boost="true" class="new-element">
  <a href="/task/1">clean room</a>
  <form
    hx-trigger="click"
    hx-delete="/delete"
    hx-target="closest .new-element"
    hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"
  >
    <input type="hidden" name="task" value="1" />
    delete
  </form>
</div>
```

> Most of the snippets in the delete form are similar to the other examples. But in the `hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"` attribute I added an extra value. This value will delay the swapping of the element by 1 second because I want to do a CSS animation during that time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most of the snippets in the delete form are similar to the other examples. But in the `hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"` attribute, I added an extra value. This value will delay the swapping of the element by 1 second because I want to do a CSS animation during that time.
```

> While htmx is doing the swapping of the element it also adds the `htmx-swapping` class to the element.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While htmx is doing the swapping of the element, it also adds the `htmx-swapping` class to the element.
```

Now I can add any CSS effect I want to the `htmx-swapping` class.

```CSS
.htmx-swapping {
  opacity: 0;
  transition: opacity 1s ease-out;
}
```

![demo](/src/assets/htmx/delete.gif)

> ## WebSockets

Reviewer 3: make sure WebSockets / websockets is spelled in the same way throughout the blogpost. Of course you can spell it in singular or plural depending on the context.

Currently, if we add a todo task to our list, it won't be shown in another tab or browser opening the same page. This can be achieved using websockets. Fortunately htmx supports websockets.

```html
<div id="ws" hx-ws="connect:/ws" hx-trigger="task"></div>
```

The `hx-ws` attribute takes the websocket endpoint and makes a connection to it.

> After adding this line to the code I just have to create a websocket that listens for input by the user and broadcasts it to all clients.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After adding this line to the code, I just have to create a websocket that listens for input by the user and broadcasts it to all clients.
```

```go
import(
    ...
    "golang.org/x/net/websocket"
    "sync"
    ...
)

func main(){
    ...
    server := NewServer()

>     http.Handle("/ws", websocket.Handler(server.websocketHandler)) // handels the saving and broadcasting of data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    http.Handle("/ws", websocket.Handler(server.websocketHandler)) // handles the saving and broadcasting of data
```

    ...
}
```

> Update the form

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Update the form:
```

</div>
```

(adding item 1)

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
</div>
```

After adding another item (item 2)

```html
<div id="todo-list">
  <div>item 1</div>
  <div>item 2</div>
</div>
```

But on page load (e.g. if we refresh the page) the list of tasks will not be shown.
To make that work, we need to make a `GET` request.

```html
<div id="todo-list" hx-get="/taskList" hx-trigger="load"></div>
```

In the above html, I have added `hx-get` with value `/tasklist` and `hx-trigger` with value 'load'. The `load` value specifies when the request is sent in this case it's when the html file is loaded.

```go
func listTask(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    tastList := getTODO() // gets data from database and returns html
    io.WriteString(w, tastList)
}
func main() {
    ...
    http.HandleFunc("/save", listTask)
    ...
}
```
![demo](src/assets/htmx/yMVvdP3.gif)

Now the list is shown even when the page is refreshed.

For edit let's try some thing different. Previously we did all our operations in a single page for edit we will be navigating to another page without refreshing the wholepage unlike normal html page navigation using an anchor tag.

> First let's make clicking on the todo item go to a different page that will contain form for updating the todo item.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First let's make clicking on the todo item go to a different page that will contain a form for updating the todo item list.
```

> For that, we need to get an anchor tag instead of a div with the todo text inside a div

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For that, we need to get an anchor tag instead of a div with the todo text inside a div.
```
Are you referring to the ID of the element or the anchor link in the target?
And also be more specific in which element will be replaced... maybe using the direct article "the" instead of unspecific "a" helps for clarification

> In the server i will get the task and return the proper form for updating that task.

Reviewer 3: This sentence sounds very informal, like spoken language...

```suggestion
On the server side, I will get the task and return the proper form for updating that task.
```
Sometimes you write "I" will... , in other places you write "we" will... 
try to be consistent in your writing style.

```go
func main() {
    ...

>     http.HandleFunc("/task/", indivisualTask)

Reviewer 3: that's a rather unique name for the variable... maybe individualTask or something similar is more intuitive for the reader...

    ...
}
```

> **example response from server**

Reviewer 3: I think this is the only instance you've used bold for a heading so far. Try to use the same styling for your headings throughout the blog unless you really want something to stand out.

```htmx
  <div hx-boost="true">

>       <a href="/task/asdasda">asdasda</a>

Reviewer 5: I think it's not a good practice to use just random alphabets for example. It will be better if you use a proper word.

  </div>
```

> Here the `hx-boost` attribute will replace the body element and add the previous page to the history entry which will allow you to go back if needed.

Reviewer 3: This is a very long sentence... by separating it into two, it will be easier for the reader to follow your train of thoughts

![demo](src/assets/htmx/bktyFpm.gif)

For the actual editing, it will be similar to the other examples.

```html
<div>
  <div>clean room</div>
  <form id="myForm2" hx-put="/edit" hx-target="#app">
    <input type="text" name="task" required="" />
    <input type="hidden" name="old" value="clean room" />
    <input type="submit" value="edit" />
  </form>
</div>
```

Now let's perform deletion on the list.

First, we have to make a delete button.

> For that, I will update the list template and add a delete form

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For that, I will update the list template and add a delete form:
```

```html
<div hx-boost="true" class="new-element">

>   <a href="/task/dasdas">dasdas</a>

Reviewer 5: Same here, please use proper wording. Also update in other places where these type of wording is used.

  <form
    hx-trigger="click"
    hx-delete="/delete"
    hx-target="closest .new-element"
    hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"
  >
    <input type="hidden" name="task" value="dasdas" />
    delete
  </form>
</div>
```

> Most of the snippets in the delete form are similar to the other examples. but in the `hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"` attribute I added an extra value . All that value does is delay the swapping of the element by 1 second because i want to do a css animation during that time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most of the snippets in the delete form are similar to the other examples. But in the `hx-swap="outerHTML swap:1s"` attribute I added an extra value. This value is delay the swapping of the element by 1 second because I want to do a CSS animation during that time.
```

While htmx is doing the swapping of the element it also adds the `htmx-swapping` class to the element.

> Now i can add any css effect I want to the `htmx-swapping` class.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now I can add any css effect I want to the `htmx-swapping` class.
```

```css
.htmx-swapping {
  opacity: 0;
  transition: opacity 1s ease-out;
}
```

![demo](src/assets/htmx/khdzEgM.gif)

## WebSockets

> Currently, if we add a todo task to our list it won't be shown to another tab/browser opening the same page which can be achieved using websockets. Fortunately htmx supports websockets.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, if we add a todo task to our list, it won't be shown in another tab or browser opening the same page. This can be achieved using websockets. Fortunately htmx supports websockets.
```

Let's first make a connection to a websocket.

```html
<div id="ws" hx-ws="connect:/ws" hx-trigger="task"></div>
```

The `hx-ws` attribute takes the websocket endpoint and makes a connection to it.

```go
import(
    ...
    "golang.org/x/net/websocket"
    "sync"
    ...
)

type Server struct {
    conns map[*websocket.Conn]bool
    mutex sync.Mutex
}

func NewServer() *Server {
    return &Server{
        conns: make(map[*websocket.Conn]bool),
        mutex: sync.Mutex{},
    }
}
func main(){
    ...
    server := NewServer()
    http.Handle("/ws", nil)
    ...
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: It might be useful for the reader to comment a little bit on what you're doing in this code snippet.

Update the form

```html
<form
  id="myForm1"
  hx-ws="send:submit"
  hx-target="#todo-list"
  hx-swap="beforeend"
>
  <input type="text" name="task" required />
  <input type="submit" value="save ws" />
</form>
```

> In the `hx-ws` attribute of form we are telling htmx to send value to the websocket endpoint on the submit event

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the `hx-ws` attribute of form we are telling htmx to send the values to the websocket endpoint on the submit event.
```

```go
func (s *Server) websocketHandler(ws *websocket.Conn) {
    broadcast() // broadcast the response
}
func main(){
    ...
    http.Handle("/ws", websocket.Handler(server.websocketHandler))
    ...
}
```

> Now we can see our list getting updated everywhere

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we can see our list getting updated everywhere.
```

![demo](src/assets/htmx/n4RKOUQ.gif)

> These were some basics of htmx to get started with . Now you can build on it and make something more interesting by yourself.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These were some basics of htmx to get started with. Now you can build on it and make something more interesting by yourself.
```

I actually think you went way beyond just the very basics in this blog post :)
You could even consider splitting it into 2 parts...

> And if you want to learn more about htmx docs is [here](https://htmx.org/docs/)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And if you want to learn more about htmx, have a look at the docs [here](https://htmx.org/docs/)
```
